+++
title = "A Covid-19 Tweeter"
date = 2020-05-16T13:56:48+05:30
draft = false
tags = ["covid-19", "twitter", "python"]
categories = []
+++
So I finally got developer account access from Twitter to post automated coronavirus updates which I had applied for last [month](../01).
In this part, we will look at the process of creating an app, and developing the code to post tweets programmatically.

We are going to use Python3 as our programming language and the `tweepy` python library to access Twiiter's APIs, along with `lxml` to parse the Worldometers site for data. We need to install these dependencies in a new python virtual environment, and activate it to start developing.

First, we go to the [apps page](https://developer.twitter.com/en/apps) and create an app. We give an app name, add a description and a website url. dd description and a website url. At the bottom, we need to describe briefly how we are going to use the app, and press create.

Once created, go to the *Keys and Tokens* tab, and generate Access Token and Access Token Secret, and copy them along with the consumer API keys in a python file called _config.py_ as below:
```
CONSUMER_KEY = '<API key>'
CONSUMER_SECRET = '<API secret key>'
ACCESS_TOKEN = '<Access token>'
ACCESS_TOKEN_SECRET = '<Access token secret>'
```

In the same folder as _config.py_, create another python file called _app.py_ and import the tweepy module, the keys from config and authenticate the app as below:
```
auth = tweepy.OAuthHandler(CONSUMER_KEY, CONSUMER_SECRET)
auth.set_access_token(ACCESS_TOKEN, ACCESS_TOKEN_SECRET)
```

Then, create an API object and verify the access credentials as below:
```
api = tweepy.API(auth)
api.verify_credentials()
```

We are now ready to compose our tweet and post it to Twitter.

We use the `requests` library to fetch the data for our tweet from Worldometers, parse it using `xpath` and save it in a variable called _tweet_. We can then post our tweet using a single line of code as below:
```
api.update_status(tweet)
```
To post the tweet, simply run the _app.py_ from the console with the command
```
$ python app.py
```

We now have a basic Twitter bot ready, and can post tweets whenever we run our script. Feel free to checkout the code on [Github](https://github.com/adbose/covid-tweeter) and send PRs to improve this bot.

Also, follow the bot [@covidtrackerbot](https://twitter.com/covidtrackerbot) on Twitter, and press the bell icon to get notified whenever there is a new tweet.

Our next steps would be to host it online and add more functionality like tweeting periodically from an infinite loop, or tweeting country-wise stats as they are updated on Worldometer.

Stay tuned for updates!
