+++
title = "An Introduction To Node.js"
date = 2020-07-17T11:39:54+05:30
draft = false
tags = []
categories = []
+++
Node.js is an open-source and cross-platform JavaScript runtime environment developed by Ryan Dahl in 2009. Built on Google Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine, node.js allows developers to use JavaScript in the backend to create server-side applications.

Node.js uses a light-weight single-threaded event event loop architecture which runs applications in an asynchronous, event-driven, non-blocking I/O model. This makes it perfect for developing highly scalable _data-intensive_ real-time applications capable of handling multiple concurrent clients.
However, because of its single-threaded architecture, node.js is not suitable for CPU-intensive applications.

## Installing Node.js

In this post, we will focus on installing Node.js on a system running Ubuntu.

Node.js is available in the Ubuntu repository and we can easily install it using the `apt` package manager.

First, refresh your local package index by running:
```
$ sudo apt update
```

Then, install Node.js:
```
$ sudo apt install nodejs
```
Check that the installation was successful by running `node` or `nodejs` in the terminal. It should start up a new node shell in a new line like this:
```
>
```
You can start coding right from the shell. Example:
```
> console.log("hello node!")
```
Output:
```
hello node!
```
You can also check the version by running `node -v` or `nodejs -v`.

It is recommended to also install Node Package Manager(NPM) with Node.js. NPM is an open source library of Node.js packages.

To install NPM, run the following command:
```
$ sudo apt install npm
```
Again, check that the installation was successful by running `npm -v` or `npm --version`.

Once installed, you can use NPM to installed Node.js packages like this:
```
$ npm install express
```
You can uninstall a node package using the npm uninstall command. Example:
```
$ npm uninstall express
```

To install both Node.js and NPM, for a specific version of _node_, we can use a Node.js PPA (personal packaging archive) maintained by NodeSource.

We can use `curl` to add the particular Node.js PPA to the system like so:
```
$ curl -sL https://deb.nodesource.com/setup_14.x | sudo -E bash -
```

If `curl` is not installed on your system, first install it using:
```
$ sudo apt install curl
```

Now, you can install the Node.js package using the following command:
```
$ sudo apt install nodejs
```
The nodejs package contains both the node and npm binaries. Verify that node and npm are installed using the commands `node -v` and `npm -v`.

Another very important way to install a specific version of node.js, is using the Node Version Manager (NVM).

Visit the NVM GitHub repository, and from the [ section](https://github.com/nvm-sh/nvm#installing-and-updating) page and copy either the `curl` or `wget` command to download and install the nvm script:
```
$ curl -o- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.36.0/install.sh | bash
```
or
```
$ wget -qO- https://raw.githubusercontent.com/nvm-sh/nvm/v0.36.0/install.sh | bash
```

(Note: Do not run these scripts with `sudo` as it will enable nvm for the root user.)

Running the scripts will clone the project’s repository from Github to the `~/.nvm/` directory. You will have to close and reopen your terminal to start using nvm.

To check that nvm is installed, type `nvm --version`. If you get a version number back like `0.36.0`, then you know nvm was successfully installed.

Now, you can install a specific version of Node.js, say, `14.5.0` by simply running:
```
$ nvm install 14.5.0
```
To install the latest LTS (long term support) version, use the command:
```
$ nvm install --lts
```
You can list the installed Node.js versions with the command `nvm list` or `nvm ls`.

If you want to change the currently active version, run `nvm use` along with the version you want to switch to. Example:
```
$ nvm use 12.16.3
```

To change the default Node.js version, run the following command:
```
$ nvm alias default 14.5.0
```

That's it. Now you have all that you need to start using Node.js to make backend applications.

## Creating a basic HTTP server

Let's create a basic server in Node.js. Create a file with the name _server.js_ and add the following code in it:
```
const http = require('http');

const hostname = "127.0.0.1";
const port = 3000;

http.createServer(function(req, res) {
    res.writeHead(200, {'Content-Type': 'text/plain'});
    res.end('Hello Node!\n');
}).listen(port, hostname, ()=>{
    console.log(`Server is running at http://${hostname}:${port}/`);
});
```

Save the file, and from the terminal in the directory containing the file, run:
```
$ node server.js
```
You should see the output below:
```
Server is running at http://127.0.0.1:3000/
```
If we open the address in the browser, we should see the `Hello Node!` message.

Now, let's create the same basic web server, but using Express.

## Basic Express Server in Node.js

Express is a web application framework for Node.js that allows you to spin up robust APIs and web servers in a much easier and cleaner way.

Simply install it via npm as you would with any other package.
```
$ npm install express --save
```
With `express` installed, create a file with the name _server.js_ and add the following code in it:
```
const express = require('express');
const app = express();

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    res.send('Hello Express!');
});

app.listen(3000, () => console.log('Server is running at port 3000'));
```
If we open the address in the browser, this time we should see the message `Hello Express!`.

## Conclusion

That's all I have for now. In this post, we covered quite a few concepts about Node.js, starting from installation using various methods, installing and removing packages, and usage in a sample web server application.

You can read more about Node.js from their official docs [here](https://nodejs.org/en/docs/).
